4.21.0 Why a game approach to cowriting - cowriting, game, benefits, creativity
2020.05.2010
One great benefit of a game approach to writing is improved creativity.

QC Basic is for people who want to share writing. It’s a writing game with rules to get you started and keep you writing. Sharing a project with other players creates motivation to write. In QC Basic, you have built-in sympathetic readers as an audience, and in reading your cowriters’ work, you will be inspired to create – partly in reaction to their creativity. With the right momentum, a game of QC Basic feels like the story has its own life as it grows with natural effort from many authors.

Cowriting happens all the time
Professional writers are involved in cowriting all the time. Screenplays, TV scripts, PR and commercials, journalism with multiple reporters, are all the product of multiple hands. In contrast, the stereotypical writer is a person working alone. The arts of poetry, novels, and playwriting are thought of as lonely tasks of work, and journaling is practically a secret vice. But much published writing is not  a solo act. Novels and books of all kinds frequently have long lists of acknowledgments. Editors, researchers, first readers, spouses, and colleagues contribute to the text. 

A second (or third, or fourth) set of eyes helps to find typos and unclear writing. Having additional brains gives a broader perspective on ongoing writing and can point out overlooked angles. Higher word count, pre-editing, and improved organization make for stout projects going into a final edit.

All the advantages above can apply to any cowriting experience, whether called “cowriting” or something else. But a game approach to writing offers special advantages. 

QC Basic’s game approach
QC Basic’s game approach to cowriting makes the tasks of writing and relating to cowriters easier. Merely calling a writing project a “game” can lift some of the pressure or anxiety that many people feel about writing. Getting started writing can be easier when it’s part of a game. Confidant writers may balk at the game approach, but it may loosen them up and allow engaging with less experienced writers. The freedom to be unserious can clear writer’s block and encourage experimentation. 

Games feature rules that people agree to use to have fun. When cowriting with no rules, the rules are hidden. Any existing power differential between participants tends to create dominance within the dynamic, potentially poisoning the process or shutting out contributions from some writers. Clear game-style rules create a space where all contributors can flourish.

A clear set of rules from the beginning is a boon to your writing project. Even among experienced writers with great motivation to write together, writing in a group requires a lot of negotiation. False starts and differing expectations can waste time and energy. Group dynamics can be tamed by clear rules from the beginning. Such a group will grow out of the rules naturally and find their unique way of cowriting, but having game rules from the beginning can head off frustrations and get a writing group over the hump.

Shy or unsure writers, beginning writers, and even non-writers can benefit a lot from a game approach to writing. Playing games and telling stories are fun, natural, and everyone has had practice. To play, you have to write, so writing becomes a means to an end. 

There are some benefits that come naturally with fair cowriting – fair because the process is governed by rules. Participants gain close readers who are not critics or editors. QC Basic offers accountability because cowriters have to produce for each other. And turn-taking gives the writing forward momentum and gives the project a basic shape.

The most basic game rule in QC Basic is turn-taking, something familiar and productive. When it’s your turn, you have a responsibility to write, so you do, even just to keep the game going.  At worst, you feel a sense of relief when you hit send on an Entry. At best, you are excited to share and to find out what the other players do with your ideas. The back and forth rhythm of turn-taking underlies everything in the QC Basic experience. Nurturing it and finding your group’s pace of turn-taking are very important parts of getting a game going and keeping it alive.

Improved creativity
Calling writing a game gives freedom to be unserious. In writing first drafts, which is all that QC Basic is designed to tackle, an interior editor can put a writer’s creativity on guard and timid. Writing gets freed up with a game approach, partly because the stakes of writing as a game are low. Your goal is to play a game and have fun creating writing, not to “get it right” or to meet some challenging standard of writing.

Also, the rules open possibilities of expression because limitations spur creativity. After preliminary discussions (if any) of the form and subject of the project, a QC Basic project doesn’t suffer from “the tyranny of the empty page”. There is some shared, if evolving, understanding of what an Entry is. What it consists of, and what it does. Any Entry in a particular game has to follow, more or less closely, the Entries that have gone before. The narrative problems posed in advancing a plot stimulate problem-solving. Once you start, the game isn’t “anything goes”.

Unstated in the rules of QC Basic is a dynamic of entertaining and challenging your cowriters. Entertaining because it’s fun to know just what a character should say, and get to put those words in their mouth. Because it’s a rush to describe an action scene. Because literary description is a powerful art, available to anyone who has a pencil and paper – and an audience. When you know you have an audience working at the draft level, you are actually freed to write to be entertaining, rather than perfect.

The other half of the dynamic, challenging your cowriters, also works because you are writing in draft form in QC Basic. One kind of challenge naturally arises from the narrative rhythms of setup and payoff, cliffhanger and resolution, catastrophe and denouement. Your partner puts you in a spot, and you have to get out of it. The problems posed this way don’t have to be great dilemmas to be effective in provoking good writing. And this sort of challenge doesn’t have to be overdone.

Other challenges between cowriters include mysteries, loose ends, and tension. One great spur to creative writing is a mystery that all writers have to solve satisfactorily together. Beware, however, of keeping secrets from your cowriters, who are likely to write an Entry that contradicts a secret you’ve been waiting to reveal about a character or event. Loose ends are unavoidable in QC Basic. Writing a first draft with minimal planning, there will be ideas that are never followed up. Having interesting loose ends means that there is always an old idea or character to dust off and write about. Tension builds whenever something interesting is happening in the plot. Making tension pay off, rather than flop, fizzle out, or be subverted, is an art peculiar to serial cowriting.

One of the most satisfying aspects of creativity in QC Basic is the development of a shared setting and characters. Exploring the setting quickly starts to be a process of gliding discovery rather than sweaty invention. And the characters start to have personalities and voices. Writers can quickly grow to love the characters, flaws and all, and become protective of them. Once such characters are established, creativity can take off with just a push.

For some players, QC Basic’s game approach will be the thing that gets them to write. For others, it will be what keeps them writing, keeps them on track, and gets them to try new things in their writing. For us, the advantages to creativity have been the most important part of writing together. In co-creation, literal worlds are brought to light, and we, their creators, are left wondering where they came from.



Note: I think it’d be good to not refer to QC Basic as a game in the text. Maybe only here and in The Blurb.

Note:  “...writing first drafts, which is all that QC Basic is designed to tackle…” This is how I’m envisioning QC Basic.


Expanded Section
One of the first things young people are taught is how to take turns.  This is so fundamental by the time we are adults, we don’t even think about it.  Nearly every game has turns.  More complex games will break turns down into further sections.  Sometimes the game will have a player do all the sections of a turn at once and then the turn goes onto the next player, other games have everyone do a section in some order then go on to the next section until all the sections of the turn are done and then the next turn is started.   Even more complex games will have some sections of a turn have the players doing something at the same time and then there is a resolution phase of a turn that needs to be performed.  

So what can Quillcosm learn from games about complex turns?  What can Quillcosm incorporate into it’s rules from other complex games?  Initiative comes to mind.  Is this a good approach?  Would dividing up the ‘turn’ in Quillcosm help?  The Iteration idea has significant drawbacks as it is currently conceived of.  Can iteration be revived starting from scratch?  Isn’t starting a story and passing it to the next in line a form of iteration?  How do we add complexity to the ‘turn’ to allow multiple people to be writing at the same time?   In twister turns are taken, but in each person’s turn, they are navigating the changing body position of the last players turn.  In scrabble each person is thinking while the other is playing and must readjust to the change on the board at the end of the last person’s turn.  Story telling by turn is not really different than that.  In Banana grams each player is building their own set of words from the tiles simultaneously, is there something we can take from that?  A way for multiple threads of a story to be written simultaneously and then bring them back together?  

A step beyond what Quillcosm can do is the multiplayer live action computer game.  Yet, in some sense the role playing version of Gamequill will be taking place in this kind of process.  What can be learned from computer games?  What can be learned from RPGs in general for Quillcosm as well?  

Expanded Section
One of the first things young people are taught is how to take turns. This is so fundamental that by the time we are adults we don’t even think about it. Nearly every game has turns. Some games have turns that are more complex turns than “you go, I go”, repeat. For example, a complex game turn might have a phase where players act at the same time, followed by phases for movement and engagement.

Quillcosm can incorporate rules from complex-turn games. In keeping to strict alternating turns, a lot of writing time is wasted. Productivity is wasted if you can’t write when the muse strikes, for fear of contradicting your writing partners. Some possibilities:

• Rotating “theaters*” of writing, multiple semi-independent threads of the project that only interact when all writers are between turns. Authors can pick up any thread that is not currently being worked on by another Author. These theaters can be separated by time, place, or subject within a story. A theater could be devoted to background information, worldbuilding, character histories, or even interior development of characters.
• Working on multiple writing projects at once. When an Author is waiting for their turn at one project, they can write on the other.
• “Initiative” rules that allow writers with different output rates to do different jobs. For instance, a faster writer may fill in the outline written by another Author. 
• Players could have multiple tasks in each turn in a linear writing project. If they finish up with one, the other tasks expand until the next turn. Writing new material, adding to old Entries, projecting choices for the next turn, editing duties.
• In a non-linear writing project, Authors can invent new threads. Either as they will, or as a function of a rule, Authors can exploit “downtime” while waiting for another Author’s Entry as “found time” to advance the story in another dimension. These threads can be called “tangents*” because they may or may not influence the main story line. Tangents can also be useful in other forms of writing.

All of these suggestions can make the process of writing more layered, rich, and productive. Or they could result in frustration, complication, and wasted effort. It’s certainly not possible to try them all out at the same time. One idea is to use the simplest rules that allow productivity for the group, trying out a more complex kind of turn when some new dynamic would re-spark the group’s inspiration to write.

Quillcosm’s Iteration system itself is only a type of complex turn. Its division of writing tasks is a way to give every Author choices between writing “turns” and a number of things to work on during the turn. At root, a complex turn system is meant to allow multiple people to be writing at the same time. Bonus points if the structure of the turn improves the product.

In Twister turns are taken, but in each person’s turn, they are navigating the changing body position of the last player’s turn. In Scrabble each person thinks while the other is playing, and must readjust to the change on the board. Story telling by turn is not so different from these examples. In Bananagrams each player builds their own set of words from the tiles simultaneously. When multiple threads of a story are written simultaneously, bringing them back together becomes a task for a later turn. This can happen within the writing or in an interim, as in the Iteration cycle.

A step beyond what Quillcosm can do is the multiplayer live action computer game.  Yet, in some sense the role playing version of Gamequill will be taking place in this kind of process.  What can be learned from computer games?  What can be learned from RPGs in general for Quillcosm as well?  

Theaters – different threads of writing within a Quillcosm game.
Tangent – an Entry that doesn’t directly advance the current argument of a project.

